# Stan

Overview
Fans want more ways to show their support for their favorite creators and their communities. Creators want more ways to earn revenue from their fans without having to rely solely on a single platform. Enter Stan: the creator loyalty program. Through Stan, fans can receive personalized prizes from their favorite creators by either earning points by engaging with a creator's content or paying upfront. The final product is a website application that will connect with Instagram, Facebook and Messenger to collect usage data and use that data to offer points and prizes for fans.

Background
Stan is a noun used to describe an extremely devoted and enthusiastic fan of someone or something. And that’s what Stan’s all about: empowering these super fans. Creators are people who make a living creating content for their fanbase. My product is catering to a two-sided marketplace by meeting the needs of both fans and creators. 

Problem
The creator economy is exploding. There are over 50 million creators and it's a 100 billion dollar market, making it one of the fastest-growing business sectors. Twitch is currently the leader in livestream content but I believe that Meta has the user base and talent to supersede this. I believe that Meta can do more to help content creators monetize their audience enough to go full-time. Content creators are key to platforms like Facebook: they are community builders and their content drives engagement which drives revenue through advertising (which represents 98% of Facebook revenue). A key challenge creators have is growing their audience and increasing engagement on their content to improve overall visibility on platforms like Instagram. To help address this issue, over the summer I want to work on a product called Stan, a content creator loyalty program focused on helping live streamers increase engagement on their content and helping fans feel rewarded for their contributions through earning points and prizes. Creating an MVP will enable me to focus on quickly validating whether Stan is solving a deep enough pain point for both creators and fans. 

Motivation
I believe in the potential of the creator economy. As seen over the last few years, the space is exploding with over 90% YoY viewership growth on live streaming platforms like Twitch. Because of this, I want to take the next week to research and deeply understand the pain points of creators, and build Stan to resolve these issues. I have seen the power of unlocking super fans through the rise and success of Cameo, a company that helps creators make personalized videos for fans, that received over $100M in revenue last year. I want to learn how to consistently incentivize these top 5% of fans to support their favorite creators. Afterwards, I want to take my learnings to convert the other 95% into super fans, something that no one has been able to crack yet. By providing a better support system for creators, I am looking to learn how to lower the barrier of entry for future creators and empower people to live an independent life where they are in control of what they love doing.

Product Breakdown 
There are 3 key steps with Stan:
One: Fans sync their social media accounts like Instagram, Facebook and Messenger to the platform.
Two: Fans earn points for engaging with the creators content on these platforms so for example, they can earn one point by watching a livestream or liking a post on Instagram.
Three: Fans can redeem these points for personalized prizes like a shoutout or autograph.

There are three key parts of the product, Currency, Shop and the Lottery. The main currency on Stan is called Stan points and there are two ways to earn them. The first way is that fans can accumulate stan points by engaging with the creators content like watching a video on YouTube. The second way is that fans can buy them using cash and if I were to plan to launch the product, I could effectively monetize by taking a 20% cut of these transactions. Fan’s can use their points to redeem prizes at the Shop and also gift them to other members of the community. Creators can start a lottery where they raffle away a live prize (such as a video shoutout) to fans who enter it. Fans earn a chance to enter the lottery by fulfilling a certain task that the creator decides. 

Market Size and User Segment
My ultimate goal is to help content creators scale themselves and the initial segment I am focusing on is Facebook Gaming streamers. For my user segment, I decided to focus on "middle class" streamers which I define as creators who have 100 to 1000 daily average live viewers. These are streamers who typically have already developed a small, strong following of fans and are undergoing the most growth. Twitch is currently the leader in livestream content as there were 17 billion hours watched on Twitch in comparison to 10 billion from Youtube Live and 3 billion on Facebook Gaming in 2020. The current influencer marketing TAM is ~$8bn and it’s expected to grow to $15bn by 2022, making it one of the fastest-growing business sectors. 

Cameo, a company in a similar space to Stan that lets fans buy personalized video shoutouts from creators, had over $100M in revenue last year with 10,000 new creators and 1.3M+ videos sold in just its 4th year in the market. This gives me the conviction that the market for fan engagement is large and growing. 

The TAM (Total Addressable Market) is all 46.7M online creators who receive money creating content online. The SAM (Serviceable Addressable Market) is live streamers (content creators that stream live content), particularly focused on gaming. To start, I am focusing on Facebook gaming streamers (with over 500K+ streamers on the platform). The SOM (Share of Market) right now is the 15 streamers that I have interviewed, but my goal is to reach out to more facebook gaming creators while developing Stan this summer.

Challenges
Catering to a two-sided marketplace by meeting the needs of both fans and creators. I believe that any two-sided marketplace is complex so I have conducted over 30+ user interviews between creators and fans to understand the dynamics between them. I plan to meet the needs of both sides by continuing to listen to our users' pain points and needs.
Staying top of mind for our users as the go-to place for fan-to-fan or fan-to-creator platforms will be difficult. To increase retention, I plan on exploring new avenues such as limited-time prizes that hook users back into the app. 
Maintaining user growth. With any product, distribution is key to success. I believe Stan will have significant user growth due to the viral nature of fan interactions and word of mouth, as super fans will refer each other for more points as well as bring their favorite creators onboard.

Product Differentiation and Value Proposition
Creators are able to have multiple revenue streams so they can use platforms like Patreon and Cameo instead of Stan but my product is really unique for three key reasons. One is that Stan actually helps creators grow their audience size by incentivizing more engagement on their content while other platforms only help creators monetize, not grow, but growth is one of the biggest challenges for creators and visibility is a core part of generating revenue. The second is that on other platforms like Cameo and Patreon, creators have to compete for attention with other creators because they are shown side-by side. With Stan, creators are showcased individually by giving them their own landing pages and urls, which means that creators can truly own their space, which they care a lot about.

I was able to conduct over 30 user interviews with members of a creator community and identified 2 key personas. There are “First Fans” who really appreciate the attention from the creator and show up to the streams just for them. The other half of the community are “Community Fans” who mainly care about giving back and helping the community grow and connecting with other members. The third differentiator is that Stan supports both “First Fans” and “Community Fans”. To support “First Fans”, Stan helps them earn bragging rights by accumulating points that appear on a leaderboard because they are very competitive. Stan also helps them receive special attention from the creator through the Store where fans are able to purchase prizes like a video shout out during a stream. For “Community Fans”, Stan helps them grow the fan community by incentivizing members to earn points by engaging with the creators’ content. In addition, Stan helps them support the fan community by allowing them to give prizes to fellow Fans. There is actually a lot of existing buying behavior in this area like for example, over 40% of a creator (with 1 million subscribers across platform) income comes from fans buying special perks for other fans, through a feature called Gifted Subs on Twitch. Stan serves the “Community Fans” who are a big part of the market and are often underserved. 

The fourth is that Stan collects really unique fan data. I see creators as businesses and they will need the same software that businesses need. Software needs data to power it and I plan on building a really strong data mode with Stan. It is difficult to get fans to sync their social media accounts but the gamification and prizes allows me to collect fan data that no other tool has to enable creators to take personalized actions across all platforms. For example, a creator can run a marketing campaign that reaches their fans across Instagram, Facebook and Messenger, create an onboarding flow for new fans or automate sending gifts to fans such as hoodies.

Twitch Channel Points is a customizable points program that lets streamers reward members of their community with perks, including a taste of benefits typically reserved for subscribers. Both Stan Points and Channel Points share the goal of enabling broadcasters to fan interaction and encouraging engagement but there are two key differences. One is that Stan Points can be used for more everlasting prizes that increase fan retention beyond the stream, such as a drawing sent through email. In contrast, Channel Points are used for ephemeral prizes that go away after the stream. I believe these everlasting prizes will significantly increase viewer retention on Facebook Gaming. Another differentiator is that Stan Points can be used during live lotteries, which is a feature that Channel Points (and Custom Rewards) do not support today. From my user research with fans, I believe Stan Points will increase engagement on Facebook Gaming and are not competitive with Channel Points. 
Creator Case Study
In the past I was able to connect with a creator who has amassed over 1 million followers across multiple platforms to develop a proof of concept for Stan around his community of fans. He’s a 21 year old college student by day and a video game live streamer by night and is also the top 0.01% twitch streamers in terms of views. His growth on the Twitch platform has been exploding and his viewership has grown over 100% over the last two months. He’s also grown a large audience across multiple platforms like Tiktok and YouTube. With this growth comes a really loving and supportive fanbase and most importantly, he’s doing what he loves which is making video game content for his fans. Even with this loving audience, he still cannot go full time because of 4 key problems. 

The first is that he juggles multiple social media channels so he does not have enough time to maintain an audience cross platform. The second is getting banned on live streaming platforms like Twitch is really common so he has a lot of risk streaming on a single platform. The third is he spends 60% of his time editing so he does not have time to make sure each video grows his audience. Fourth is that his dream is to be a full time streamer but he cannot effectively monetize his audience enough to do that. His problems are not unique to him alone. He is one of millions of creators who share these pain points on Twitch and other live streaming platforms.

Here’s where I step in with Stan: the creator loyalty platform. The first problem was that Creators struggle to maintain an audience across multiple platforms so Stan provides cross platform analytics like what percentage of his Twitter followers are paid Twitch subscribers which helps him prioritize certain content to gain the most interaction. Second is that if he were to ever get banned on a platform, he has access to their emails when Fans sync their accounts so he is able to communicate to his audience directly. In terms of growing his audience, Stan will help him reach a larger audience through Stan points which increases engagement on his content and improves his overall visibility on different platforms. And finally, Stan helps him accomplish his dream of becoming a full time streamer by allowing him to monetize his audience by directly charging fans for digital prizes. 

Team Background
Anaum Khan is a rising junior majoring in Computer Science at the University of Maryland. She has been involved in the UMD’s entrepreneurship ecosystem since high school where she went to hackathons like Technica and Bitcamp and learned how much she loved building new things. In 2019, she co-founded an organization called Codefy to provide free, accessible computer science courses and opportunities to middle and high school students. As executive director, she led a team of 180 volunteers to run 4 main programs: 11 unique coding classes with 2300 enrollments, a college mentorship research program with 55 students, 10 workshops with 800 participants and 2 coding competitions (hackathons) with 450 participants. She is currently the Executive Director for Startup Shell, UMD’s largest student-run startup incubator with over $100 million in combined value across ventures and plays a key role in fostering a new generation of venture-scale companies. She is currently working on launching the second cohort of Technica’s (the world’s largest hackathon for underrepresented genders) fellowship program which is a 6-week initiative that seeks to democratize access to the tech industry by matching underrepresented computer science students with opportunities to gain industry experience in software development at rising startups. She led a team of 10 organizers as the director for the sponsorship and finance team of Bitcamp, UMD's premier hackathon bringing together over 1,400 students each year, to contact and manage relationships with 26 independent corporations to fulfill a budget of
$200,000.

Albert Untung and Kayla MacDonald are Software Engineers at Meta on the Instagram Mental Well-being Team and specialize in Full Stack Development. 
